# 22/08. TCP header cont.

## TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)

{% hint style="info" %}
Things like Youtube and Netflix still use TCP.
{% endhint %}

RST stops connection immediately

Window Size = how much data can be transferred

SYN - Synchronize.

3 way handshake - Cell phone call example

If a data loss happens, you have to continue from the last point where loss happened

You can still be connected with a window size 0 (in tcp header). Like on hold with a cell phone call

Reset is done with R flag.

Conversation can end without an R flag or a F flag if one of the devices drops from the connection



Start of TCP (3 way handshake)

SYN - SYN ACK - ACK

End of TCP (4 way handshake)

FIN - FIN ACK - ACK



MTU (Ethernet) = 1500

MSS (Maximum Segment Size) = 1460

SACK = Selective ACK

SACK 5-10 = I got 5 through 10 but nothing before it. So it will resend 3,4 and then continue on from 11,12 (Look at pdf for more clarity - Data Loss and Retransmission)



Lab Note:

Between us and the server, raw sequence number (big number) is used. Relative number (0,1,2) is used just to make it easier for our eyes

## UDP (User datagram protocol)

{% hint style="info" %}
UDP is **Connectionless + Unreliable. No Acknowledgement**
{% endhint %}

{% hint style="info" %}
In UDP over IPv4 Checksum header in UDP flag is optional. In IPv6 it is required.

This is because IPv4 has Checksum, but IPv6 does not
{% endhint %}

QUIC (Quick UDP Internet Connections). New technology, developed by google. Standardized in 2020. Web browser has to support it. QUIC runs over UDP

QUIC support must be by a browser using **HTTPv3**

{% hint style="info" %}
JHam thinks QUIC is Session Layer protocol
{% endhint %}

