# 10/09. Bash Scripting, Variables, Loops, Functions

**Exam INFO:** More than half will be about grep

## Variables

Local and Environment variables

{% hint style="info" %}
Dont leave spaces in bash when creating variables
{% endhint %}

> linux="Kali"

> echo $linux
>
> Kali

`env` = check env variables

{% hint style="info" %}
CD command modifies PWD variable in env variables
{% endhint %}

When writing commands, it does not know where to find them. So it looks to path variable in env variables. And then searches in given folders for binary

`export` = convert local variable to env variable (Is valid until user logs out)

`unset` = opposite of export

{% hint style="info" %}
Local variables only exist in current shell. Environment variables are global, system-wide
{% endhint %}

$PATH = lists all the places that the system can look for programs to execute

### Command Substitution

echo `` `pwd` `` = puts the result of `pwd` inside a string after echo

More modern approach for this is:

`echo $(pwd)`

### read

> `read input1` = Read an input and assign it to input1 variable

> `echo $input1` = Whatever you put in inside input1 variable when using read command

read -p "Prompt displayed to user" -s(silent mode) -t \<terminate input after n seconds>

### Special Variables

`$0` = name of the script itself

`$?` = checks exit code for the previous code (mostly 0,1,2)

0 - Success

1 - Successfully executed but wrong output

2 - Error

`$#` = number of arguments passed to the script

`$*` = all parameters, in one string

`$@` = all parameters, is a set of string. Something that can be used in for loop

`$$` = check for process id of current process (terminal)

## Double Quotes

Double quotes stop the shell from understanding glob characters (`*, ?,  [, ]`)

It will interpret $ symbol. So it can grab variables

## Single Quotes

Single quotes = raw string. **Does not understand variables**. No interpretation is going on. Takes characters as literal

> echo 'car is $100'
>
> car is $100

## Backslash Character

What if you want to have $PATH treated as a variable and $1 not?&#x20;

In this case, use a backslash \ character in front of the dollar sign $ character to prevent the shell from interpreting it

## shebang

`#!` (shebang) = marks following text as executable

`/bin/bash` = absolute path to the interpreter

## Branching Structures

`test expression` = check for certain conditions. (if a file exists, if a path exists, etc.)

### if statement

> `if somecommand; then`
>
> &#x20;   `# do this if somecommand has an exit code of 0`
>
> `fi`

`if test -f /tmp/foo; then`

or

`if [ -f /tmp/foo ]; then`

### case statement

is a little confusing.&#x20;

Starts with `)` ends with `;;`

## Loops

for loop example:

> `#!/bin/bash`&#x20;
>
> `SERVERS="servera serverb serverc"`&#x20;
>
> `for S in $SERVERS; do`&#x20;
>
> &#x20;   `echo "Doing something to $S"`&#x20;
>
> `done`

## Functions

